Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: pulse oximetry.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is pulse oximetry, and why is it so important?
Pulse oximetry is the continuous, non-invasive measurement of the arterial oxygen
saturation of haemoglobin, displayed as the peripheral oxygen saturation,
together with the pulse rate, and it is one of the most important monitors in all
of medicine, an essential and mandatory standard of anaesthetic monitoring.
It measures the percentage of the haemoglobin in the arterial blood that is bound
to oxygen, the oxygen saturation, by an optical method applied across a peripheral
tissue bed such as a fingertip or earlobe,
giving a continuous reading without the need for a blood sample.
Its importance lies in the fact that it provides early,
continuous warning of hypoxaemia — a fall in the oxygenation of the arterial blood
— which is one of the commonest and most dangerous events in anaesthesia and
critical care, and which is otherwise difficult to detect clinically until it is
advanced, since cyanosis is a late and unreliable sign.
By giving an immediate, audible and visual indication of falling saturation,
the pulse oximeter allows hypoxaemia to be recognised and corrected before harm
occurs.
It is simple, non-invasive, continuous, requires no calibration by the user,
and is applicable in almost every clinical setting,
which is why its introduction has been regarded as one of the most important
advances in patient safety.
So pulse oximetry is the continuous non-invasive optical measurement of arterial
oxygen saturation and pulse rate across a peripheral tissue bed,
and it is essential because it gives early continuous warning of hypoxaemia — a
common and dangerous event poorly detected clinically — allowing its correction
before harm, while being simple, non-invasive and universally applicable.
What exactly does it measure, and in what units?
What the pulse oximeter measures is the functional oxygen saturation of the
arterial haemoglobin, expressed as a percentage,
and being precise about this quantity and how it relates to the oxygen content and
the oxygen tension is the basis of interpreting the reading.
The oxygen saturation is the proportion of the available haemoglobin that is
combined with oxygen, expressed as a percentage;
the value displayed by the pulse oximeter is conventionally written as the
peripheral oxygen saturation, to distinguish it from the arterial saturation
measured directly by a blood-gas analyser.
A normal value breathing air is about ninety-six to one hundred per cent.
The pulse oximeter measures the functional saturation — the oxygenated haemoglobin
as a proportion of the haemoglobin capable of carrying oxygen, that is,
oxygenated plus deoxygenated haemoglobin — rather than the fractional saturation,
which would include any dyshaemoglobins in the denominator.
It is important to appreciate that saturation is related to, but distinct from,
the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood:
the two are linked by the sigmoid oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve,
so that the saturation remains high over a wide range of high oxygen tensions and
falls steeply only when the tension falls below about eight kilopascals.
Consequently the saturation is relatively insensitive to falls in oxygen tension
while the tension remains on the flat upper part of the curve.
So the pulse oximeter measures the functional arterial oxygen saturation as a
percentage, normally ninety-six to one hundred per cent breathing air,
being the proportion of oxygen-carrying haemoglobin that is oxygenated;
this is related to the oxygen tension through the sigmoid dissociation curve,
remaining high until the tension falls below about eight kilopascals,
so it is a relatively late but vital indicator of falling oxygen tension.
On what two physical principles does the pulse oximeter depend?
The pulse oximeter depends on the combination of two physical principles —
spectrophotometry, the differential absorption of light by oxygenated and
deoxygenated haemoglobin, and plethysmography,
the use of the pulsatile arterial signal to isolate the arterial blood — and it is
the ingenious combination of these two that allows the non-invasive measurement of
arterial saturation.
The first principle is spectrophotometric:
oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin differ in their colour and so in the way
they absorb light of different wavelengths.
Oxygenated haemoglobin absorbs less red light and more infrared light,
while deoxygenated haemoglobin absorbs more red light and less infrared;
this is why oxygenated blood is bright red and deoxygenated blood is darker.
By measuring the absorption of red and infrared light by the tissue,
the relative proportions of the two forms of haemoglobin, and so the saturation,
can be determined.
The second principle is plethysmographic:
the only component of the absorption that pulsates in time with the heartbeat is
that due to the pulsatile arterial blood,
the inflow of arterial blood with each beat increasing the volume and so the
absorption.
By detecting only this pulsatile component of the absorption and discarding the
constant, non-pulsatile component due to tissue, venous blood and bone,
the oximeter isolates the absorption due to arterial blood alone,
so that the saturation it derives is that of the arterial blood.
So the pulse oximeter depends on spectrophotometry — oxygenated and deoxygenated
haemoglobin absorbing red and infrared light differently — and on plethysmography —
detecting only the pulsatile component of absorption due to arterial blood — the
combination allowing the non-invasive measurement of arterial oxygen saturation.
Explain how the red and infrared absorption gives the saturation.
The derivation of the saturation from the absorption of the two wavelengths of
light follows from the different absorption spectra of the two forms of haemoglobin
at those wavelengths, and explaining this makes clear how the device computes the
saturation and why those particular wavelengths are chosen.
The oximeter uses two light-emitting diodes,
one emitting red light at a wavelength of about six hundred and sixty nanometres
and one emitting infrared light at about nine hundred and forty nanometres,
shining alternately through the tissue to a photodetector on the other side.
At six hundred and sixty nanometres, in the red,
deoxygenated haemoglobin absorbs considerably more light than oxygenated
haemoglobin; at nine hundred and forty nanometres, in the infrared,
oxygenated haemoglobin absorbs somewhat more than deoxygenated.
These wavelengths are chosen because the difference in absorption between the two
forms is large and well-characterised there,
and because nine hundred and forty nanometres is near the isobestic point region
helpful for reference.
The oximeter measures the pulsatile absorption at each wavelength and computes the
ratio of the pulsatile red absorption to the pulsatile infrared absorption;
this ratio depends on the proportions of oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin,
that is, on the saturation.
The device then converts this ratio to a saturation using a calibration
relationship. Because the absolute path length is unknown,
it is the ratio of the two pulsatile signals that is used,
which cancels the path length.
So the oximeter shines red light at about six hundred and sixty nanometres,
where deoxygenated haemoglobin absorbs more,
and infrared at about nine hundred and forty nanometres,
where oxygenated haemoglobin absorbs more;
it computes the ratio of the pulsatile absorptions at the two wavelengths,
which depends on the saturation, and converts this ratio to a saturation through a
calibration, the use of a ratio cancelling the unknown path length.
How is the device calibrated, given that the path length is unknown?
The calibration of the pulse oximeter is a crucial and somewhat unusual feature,
because the relationship between the measured ratio of absorptions and the
saturation cannot be derived purely theoretically and is instead established
empirically, and understanding this explains both how the device is calibrated and
why it has particular limitations.
In principle the absorption follows the Beer-Lambert law,
but in practice the light passing through living tissue is scattered as well as
absorbed, the path length is unknown and variable,
and the simple law does not hold exactly;
therefore the relationship between the measured ratio of pulsatile red to infrared
absorption and the actual saturation cannot be calculated from first principles.
Instead, the manufacturers calibrate the device empirically:
healthy volunteers are made progressively hypoxaemic under controlled conditions
down to saturations of about seventy to eighty per cent,
their actual arterial saturation measured directly by a co-oximeter on blood
samples, and the relationship between the oximeter's ratio and the true saturation
is established and stored in the device as a calibration curve.
The device then uses this stored empirical relationship to convert the measured
ratio to a displayed saturation. Two consequences follow.
First, the device requires no calibration by the user.
Second, because the calibration was derived in healthy volunteers down to only
about seventy per cent, the oximeter is accurate in the normal and moderately low
range but becomes progressively less accurate below about seventy per cent,
where readings are extrapolated and unreliable.
So the pulse oximeter is calibrated empirically,
by relating its measured absorption ratio to the true saturation measured in
volunteers made hypoxaemic, because scattering and the unknown path length prevent
theoretical calculation; the stored calibration means no user calibration is needed
but makes the device accurate in the normal and moderate range yet unreliable below
about seventy per cent.
Describe the components of the pulse oximeter probe and processing.
The pulse oximeter comprises a probe applied to the tissue and the processing and
display unit, and an account of the components and how the signal is processed
explains how the pulsatile arterial signal is isolated and the saturation derived.
The probe contains, on one side, two light-emitting diodes,
the red and the infrared, and, on the opposite side across the tissue,
a single photodetector, usually a photodiode,
that measures the light transmitted through the tissue;
transmission probes are applied across a finger, toe or earlobe,
while reflectance probes, with the detector beside the emitters,
can be applied to the forehead.
The two diodes are switched on alternately,
and there is also a period with both off, many times a second,
so that the detector measures the red absorption, the infrared absorption,
and the ambient light separately in rapid succession;
the ambient light is subtracted to correct for background illumination.
The processor separates, for each wavelength,
the large constant component of the absorption — due to tissue, bone,
and venous and capillary blood — from the small pulsatile component due to the
inflow of arterial blood with each heartbeat.
It computes the ratio of the pulsatile to the constant absorption at each
wavelength, and then the ratio of these between the two wavelengths,
which it converts to the saturation.
It also derives the pulse rate from the frequency of the pulsation and displays the
plethysmographic waveform.
So the probe contains red and infrared light-emitting diodes and a photodetector
across or beside the tissue; the diodes are switched alternately with the detector
also sampling ambient light, and the processor separates the pulsatile arterial
component from the constant background,
computes the ratio of pulsatile absorptions between the wavelengths to give the
saturation, and derives the pulse rate and the plethysmographic waveform.
Why is the shape of the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve important to
interpretation?
The sigmoid shape of the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve is fundamental to
interpreting the saturation displayed by the pulse oximeter,
because it determines the relationship between the saturation and the underlying
oxygen tension and so the sensitivity of the saturation as a warning of falling
oxygenation.
The dissociation curve, which relates the oxygen saturation of haemoglobin to the
partial pressure of oxygen, is S-shaped.
Over the upper, flat part of the curve,
at high oxygen tensions above about eight to ten kilopascals,
the saturation is high and changes very little as the tension changes,
so that a substantial fall in oxygen tension produces only a small fall in
saturation; the saturation is therefore a relatively insensitive indicator of
falling oxygen tension while the tension remains in this high range.
Below about eight kilopascals, on the steep part of the curve,
the saturation falls rapidly with further small falls in tension,
so that once the saturation begins to fall appreciably,
the oxygen tension is already low and falling fast.
The practical consequences are important:
a normal saturation does not guarantee a high oxygen tension or a large reserve,
since the patient may be on the flat part with the tension already falling toward
the shoulder; and once the saturation starts to drop, deterioration can be rapid.
This is why a falling saturation, even by a few per cent from a high baseline,
warrants prompt attention.
So the sigmoid dissociation curve means the saturation is insensitive to falls in
oxygen tension while the tension is high, on the flat upper part,
but falls steeply once the tension drops below about eight kilopascals;
thus a normal saturation does not guarantee a large oxygen reserve,
and a falling saturation indicates the tension is already low and may fall rapidly,
warranting prompt action.
What are the principal sources of error and artefact in pulse oximetry?
Pulse oximetry, though robust and invaluable,
is subject to a number of important sources of error and artefact,
and a thorough knowledge of these is essential to avoid being misled by an
erroneous reading.
The largest group arises from a poor or absent pulsatile signal,
since the device depends on detecting arterial pulsation:
poor peripheral perfusion from hypothermia, hypovolaemia, hypotension,
vasoconstriction or a low cardiac output, and the use of vasopressors,
reduce the pulsatile signal and make the reading unreliable or absent.
Motion artefact, from shivering or movement, is a major cause of error,
the movement being misinterpreted as pulsation.
External interference from bright ambient light and from electrical diathermy can
disturb the signal.
Optical interference arises from anything that alters light absorption:
nail varnish, particularly dark colours,
dyes such as methylene blue injected intravenously, and severe anaemia,
which reduces the signal.
Venous pulsation, as in tricuspid regurgitation or a dependent limb,
can cause underestimation. There is a small delay between a change in central
saturation and its detection at a peripheral probe.
Importantly, the device cannot distinguish the dyshaemoglobins,
as we shall discuss. And the calibration limits accuracy below about seventy per
cent.
So pulse oximetry errors arise chiefly from a poor pulsatile signal due to poor
perfusion, hypothermia, hypovolaemia and vasoconstriction; from motion artefact;
from ambient light and diathermy interference;
from optical interference by nail varnish, dyes and anaemia; from venous pulsation;
from a peripheral detection delay; and from inaccuracy below about seventy per cent
— all to be recognised lest an erroneous reading mislead.
Explain the effect of the dyshaemoglobins on the reading.
The dyshaemoglobins — chiefly carboxyhaemoglobin and methaemoglobin — are abnormal
forms of haemoglobin that the standard two-wavelength pulse oximeter cannot
correctly distinguish, and their effects are an important and potentially dangerous
source of erroneous readings that must be understood.
The standard pulse oximeter uses only two wavelengths and so can resolve only two
species, which it assumes are oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin;
it cannot identify additional abnormal haemoglobins,
and these therefore distort the reading.
Carboxyhaemoglobin, formed in carbon monoxide poisoning,
absorbs light similarly to oxygenated haemoglobin at the red wavelength,
so the oximeter reads it largely as if it were oxygenated haemoglobin and
consequently overestimates the true oxygen saturation, displaying a falsely high,
reassuring value despite dangerous hypoxaemia;
in carbon monoxide poisoning the pulse oximeter is therefore misleading and a
co-oximeter measuring carboxyhaemoglobin is needed.
Methaemoglobin, formed by certain drugs and oxidising agents,
absorbs both wavelengths strongly and tends to drive the ratio toward unity,
which corresponds to a saturation of about eighty-five per cent,
so that with significant methaemoglobinaemia the oximeter reads a falsely low value
when the true saturation is high and a falsely high value when it is low,
tending toward about eighty-five per cent regardless.
The standard oximeter cannot detect these;
multi-wavelength co-oximeters and some newer pulse oximeters using additional
wavelengths can.
So carboxyhaemoglobin makes the pulse oximeter overestimate the oxygen saturation,
dangerously masking hypoxaemia in carbon monoxide poisoning,
while methaemoglobin drives the reading toward about eighty-five per cent
regardless of the true value; the standard two-wavelength device cannot distinguish
these dyshaemoglobins, for which co-oximetry is required.
Does fetal haemoglobin or bilirubin affect the reading?
It is worth addressing specifically whether fetal haemoglobin,
bilirubin and certain other substances affect the pulse oximeter reading,
because these are common sources of confusion and the answers illustrate which
substances do and do not interfere.
Fetal haemoglobin has light-absorption characteristics in the red and infrared
regions very similar to those of adult haemoglobin,
so it does not significantly affect the accuracy of pulse oximetry;
the pulse oximeter therefore reads reliably in neonates and infants despite their
high fetal haemoglobin, which is reassuring.
Bilirubin, even at high concentrations in jaundice,
absorbs light at different wavelengths from those used by the oximeter and does not
significantly affect the oxygen saturation reading,
although it can affect the measurement of carboxyhaemoglobin by some co-oximeters.
Hyperbilirubinaemia is therefore not a cause of pulse oximeter error for saturation.
Among substances that do interfere,
the intravenous dyes methylene blue and indocyanine green transiently lower the
reading by absorbing light at the measured wavelengths,
methylene blue causing a marked transient fall.
Skin pigmentation has a small effect,
with some evidence that dark skin pigmentation can cause a slight overestimation of
saturation and occult hypoxaemia, a recognised limitation.
So fetal haemoglobin and bilirubin do not significantly affect the pulse oximeter's
saturation reading, making it reliable in neonates and in jaundice; by contrast,
intravenous dyes such as methylene blue transiently lower the reading,
and skin pigmentation has a small effect,
dark pigmentation tending slightly to overestimate the saturation.
What information does the plethysmographic waveform provide?
The plethysmographic waveform displayed by the pulse oximeter — the trace of the
pulsatile signal — provides useful information beyond the saturation and pulse
rate, and an appreciation of it enhances the value of the monitor and helps judge
the reliability of the reading.
The plethysmographic, or pleth, waveform represents the pulsatile change in light
absorption with each heartbeat, reflecting the arterial pulsation in the tissue.
First and most importantly, the presence of a good-quality,
regular pulsatile waveform confirms that the oximeter is detecting a genuine
arterial pulse and that the saturation reading is reliable; a poor,
irregular or absent waveform warns that the saturation may be unreliable,
helping to distinguish a true low saturation from an artefact.
Second, the waveform gives the pulse rate and can reveal the cardiac rhythm,
showing, for example, the irregularity of atrial fibrillation or the dropped beats
of ectopics.
Third, the amplitude of the waveform reflects the strength of the peripheral pulse
and perfusion, a small waveform indicating poor perfusion.
Fourth, respiratory variation in the amplitude or baseline of the waveform — the
degree to which the waveform swings with ventilation — has been used as an
indicator of hypovolaemia and fluid responsiveness in the ventilated patient,
since hypovolaemia exaggerates this respiratory swing.
Thus the waveform is more than a confirmation.
So the plethysmographic waveform confirms a genuine arterial pulse and the
reliability of the saturation, displays the pulse rate and rhythm,
indicates peripheral perfusion through its amplitude, and,
through its respiratory variation, can indicate hypovolaemia and fluid
responsiveness — adding considerably to the information from the saturation and
pulse rate alone.
Where may the probe be placed, and what are the considerations?
The pulse oximeter probe may be placed at a number of peripheral sites,
and the choice of site, together with the care of the probe,
involves practical considerations that affect the reliability of the signal and the
safety of the patient.
The commonest site is the finger, which usually gives a good pulsatile signal and
is convenient; the toe is an alternative.
The earlobe and the nasal septum are useful alternative sites,
and being closer to the central circulation may respond a little faster and be less
affected by peripheral vasoconstriction. The forehead, using a reflectance probe,
is used when peripheral perfusion is poor.
The site chosen should have a good pulsatile flow,
so a poorly perfused or vasoconstricted extremity is avoided;
the probe should not be placed on the same limb as a blood-pressure cuff,
since cuff inflation interrupts the signal,
nor on a limb with an arterial line or impaired circulation.
The probe must be applied correctly,
with the light source and detector aligned across the tissue, and not too tightly,
since excessive pressure or prolonged application at one site can cause pressure
injury or, with some probes, burns,
particularly in neonates and the poorly perfused;
the site should be inspected and the probe moved periodically.
Excessive ambient light should be excluded.
So the probe may be placed on the finger, toe, earlobe, nasal septum or,
with a reflectance probe, the forehead;
the site should have good pulsatile perfusion,
be away from a blood-pressure cuff or arterial line,
and the probe applied correctly and not too tightly,
with periodic inspection and repositioning to avoid pressure injury or burns,
especially in neonates and the poorly perfused.
Compare functional and fractional saturation, and the role of co-oximetry.
The distinction between functional and fractional oxygen saturation,
and the role of the co-oximeter that measures the fractional value,
is important for understanding exactly what the pulse oximeter reports and when a
more complete measurement is needed.
Functional saturation is defined as the amount of oxygenated haemoglobin expressed
as a proportion of the haemoglobin that is capable of carrying oxygen — that is,
oxygenated haemoglobin divided by the sum of oxygenated and deoxygenated
haemoglobin — excluding the dyshaemoglobins from the denominator.
Fractional saturation is the amount of oxygenated haemoglobin expressed as a
proportion of the total haemoglobin including the dyshaemoglobins — oxygenated
haemoglobin divided by the sum of all haemoglobin species,
including carboxyhaemoglobin and methaemoglobin.
The two values are equal when no dyshaemoglobins are present but diverge when they
are: the fractional saturation is lower because the dyshaemoglobins are counted in
the total.
The standard pulse oximeter, using two wavelengths,
reports an estimate of the functional saturation and cannot account for
dyshaemoglobins.
The co-oximeter is a laboratory device, part of a blood-gas analyser,
that uses multiple wavelengths of light on a haemolysed blood sample to measure all
the haemoglobin species separately — oxygenated, deoxygenated,
carboxy- and methaemoglobin — and so reports the true fractional saturation and the
dyshaemoglobin concentrations.
It is needed when dyshaemoglobinaemia is suspected, as in carbon monoxide poisoning.
So functional saturation expresses oxygenated haemoglobin against the
oxygen-carrying haemoglobin, while fractional saturation expresses it against the
total including dyshaemoglobins; the pulse oximeter estimates the functional value
and cannot detect dyshaemoglobins, whereas the multi-wavelength co-oximeter
measures all species and the true fractional saturation,
needed when dyshaemoglobinaemia is suspected.
What are the limitations of pulse oximetry as a monitor of oxygenation and
ventilation?
While pulse oximetry is invaluable,
it has important conceptual limitations as a monitor both of oxygenation and of
ventilation, and a clear understanding of these prevents false reassurance and
inappropriate reliance on the saturation alone.
As a monitor of oxygenation, the first limitation is the shape of the dissociation
curve: because the saturation remains near maximal until the oxygen tension falls
to the shoulder of the curve, a normal saturation does not indicate a high oxygen
tension or a large reserve, and a patient breathing supplemental oxygen may have a
substantially reduced oxygen tension while the saturation remains normal,
so the oximeter gives little early warning in such a patient.
The saturation measures only the proportion of haemoglobin saturated,
not the oxygen content or delivery,
so a profoundly anaemic patient may have a normal saturation yet a low oxygen
content and inadequate delivery.
As a monitor of ventilation, the pulse oximeter is poor and indirect:
it does not measure carbon dioxide and gives no direct information about the
adequacy of ventilation, and a patient receiving supplemental oxygen may
hypoventilate severely, with a rising carbon dioxide,
while the saturation remains normal,
so apnoea or hypoventilation may be undetected until very late — which is why
capnography is needed to monitor ventilation.
The reading is also delayed and is unreliable in the conditions already discussed.
So pulse oximetry's limitations are that a normal saturation does not guarantee a
high oxygen tension, reserve, content or delivery,
owing to the dissociation curve and to anaemia;
that it monitors ventilation poorly,
missing hypoventilation in the oxygenated patient;
and that it is delayed and unreliable in poor perfusion — limitations that mean it
must be combined with capnography and clinical assessment.
Summarise the clinical applications of pulse oximetry.
Drawing the uses together, pulse oximetry has become a near-universal monitor whose
applications extend throughout anaesthesia, critical care and beyond,
reflecting its value as a continuous, non-invasive warning of hypoxaemia.
In anaesthesia it is a mandatory monitor during every anaesthetic and during
sedation, providing continuous assurance of oxygenation and immediate warning of
hypoxaemia from any cause — airway obstruction, hypoventilation,
oesophageal intubation, disconnection, bronchospasm,
or reduced inspired oxygen — and guiding the management of oxygen therapy.
In recovery and on the ward it monitors patients at risk of hypoxaemia,
including those receiving opioids. In critical care it continuously monitors
oxygenation and guides ventilator and oxygen management,
and the saturation is used to set oxygen targets.
It is used during transfer, endoscopy, and procedural sedation.
It guides oxygen therapy in respiratory disease and is used in the assessment of
the acutely ill, forming part of early-warning scores.
It is valuable in neonatal and paediatric care,
including the detection of congenital heart disease by screening.
Its plethysmographic waveform aids the assessment of perfusion and fluid status.
And its portability has extended its use to pre-hospital and home settings.
So pulse oximetry is applied as a mandatory monitor in anaesthesia and sedation,
in recovery and on the ward, in critical care for oxygen and ventilator management,
during transfer and procedures, in the assessment of the acutely ill and in
early-warning scores, in neonatal screening,
and in pre-hospital and home care — a versatility reflecting its value as a
continuous warning of hypoxaemia.
What safety considerations attend its use?
The safe use of pulse oximetry involves both ensuring that its limitations do not
lead to harm through false reassurance and avoiding the minor direct hazards of the
probe, and a brief account of these completes the picture.
The principal safety consideration is interpretative:
the anaesthetist must understand that a normal saturation does not exclude
inadequate ventilation, a low oxygen tension on supplemental oxygen,
anaemia with reduced oxygen content, or dyshaemoglobinaemia,
and must not be falsely reassured by a normal value,
combining the oximeter with capnography and clinical assessment;
conversely a low reading must be checked against the waveform and the patient
before being acted upon, to avoid treating an artefact.
The audible tone, whose pitch falls with falling saturation,
and the alarms must be enabled and set appropriately so that hypoxaemia is heard.
The direct hazards of the probe are minor but real: pressure injury and,
with some probes, burns from prolonged application at one site,
particularly in neonates, the poorly perfused and during magnetic resonance
imaging, where only compatible probes must be used to avoid burns;
the site should be inspected and the probe repositioned periodically.
Cross-infection requires appropriate cleaning or single use.
The probe should not be relied upon where its signal is known to be unreliable.
So the key safety considerations are interpretative — not being falsely reassured
by a normal saturation, which does not exclude hypoventilation, low oxygen tension,
anaemia or dyshaemoglobinaemia, and checking a low reading against the waveform —
together with enabling the audible tone and alarms,
avoiding pressure injury and burns by periodic repositioning especially in neonates
and during magnetic resonance imaging, and attending to infection control.
Finally, draw the station together.
Drawing the station together, pulse oximetry is the continuous,
non-invasive measurement of arterial oxygen saturation,
and it is among the most important monitors in medicine because it gives early
warning of hypoxaemia.
It depends on two principles combined: spectrophotometry,
oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin absorbing red and infrared light
differently, and plethysmography, the detection of only the pulsatile arterial
component of absorption; from the ratio of the pulsatile red and infrared
absorptions, converted through an empirical calibration,
it derives the functional saturation.
The reading must be interpreted through the sigmoid dissociation curve,
which makes the saturation insensitive to falling oxygen tension while the tension
is high but steeply responsive once it falls below the shoulder,
so a normal value does not guarantee reserve.
It is subject to errors from poor perfusion, motion, ambient light,
dyes and nail varnish, and it cannot detect the dyshaemoglobins,
carboxyhaemoglobin causing dangerous overestimation and methaemoglobin driving the
reading toward eighty-five per cent, for which co-oximetry is needed.
It monitors ventilation poorly, missing hypoventilation in the oxygenated patient,
so must be combined with capnography.
So pulse oximetry unites the physics of light absorption and arterial pulsation
with the physiology of oxygen carriage to provide an essential,
continuous warning of hypoxaemia, whose great value is realised only when its
principles, errors and limitations are understood and it is combined with
capnography and clinical judgement.
What is the response time of pulse oximetry, and why does it lag?
The response time of the pulse oximeter — the delay between a change in the actual
arterial saturation and the change in the displayed value — is an important
practical characteristic, because this lag affects how quickly the monitor warns of
a developing hypoxaemic event.
There are two contributions to the delay.
The first is physiological and circulatory:
there is a transit time for blood to travel from the lungs,
where the saturation changes, to the peripheral site where the probe is placed,
so that a central desaturation takes some seconds to reach a finger and longer to
reach a more distal or poorly perfused site;
this delay is shorter at sites closer to the central circulation,
such as the ear or nose, and longer at the finger or toe and when perfusion is poor.
The second is instrumental: the oximeter averages the signal over several seconds
and several pulse beats to produce a stable reading and to reject artefact,
and this signal averaging introduces a further delay,
longer when a longer averaging time is selected to reduce artefact.
The total delay may amount to many seconds, even tens of seconds in poor perfusion,
so the displayed saturation lags behind events,
and a rapidly falling saturation may already be lower than displayed.
Choosing a central site and a shorter averaging time reduces the lag.
So the pulse oximeter lags because of the circulatory transit time from the lungs
to the peripheral probe — longer at distal and poorly perfused sites — and because
of the instrument's signal averaging over several beats;
the total delay may be many seconds, so the displayed value trails actual events,
reduced by using a central site and shorter averaging.
What newer developments have improved pulse oximetry?
Several newer developments have addressed the long-standing limitations of
conventional pulse oximetry — particularly motion artefact,
poor perfusion and the inability to detect dyshaemoglobins — and an awareness of
these illustrates the direction in which the technology has advanced.
The first major advance was in signal processing: newer algorithms,
often termed signal extraction technology,
better separate the true arterial signal from noise due to motion and low perfusion
by sophisticated processing that identifies and rejects the artefact,
greatly improving reliability during movement and in poorly perfused patients,
in whom older devices failed.
The second is the use of additional wavelengths:
whereas the standard oximeter uses two wavelengths and resolves only two
haemoglobin species, multi-wavelength pulse co-oximeters use several wavelengths of
light and can therefore measure and display the dyshaemoglobins —
carboxyhaemoglobin and methaemoglobin — non-invasively and continuously,
and can estimate total haemoglobin concentration,
overcoming the dangerous blindness of the conventional device to carbon monoxide
poisoning.
The third is the derivation of additional indices from the plethysmographic
waveform, such as the pleth variability index,
which quantifies the respiratory variation in the waveform as a continuous guide to
fluid responsiveness in the ventilated patient.
Reflectance and forehead probes extend monitoring to where peripheral probes fail.
So newer developments include signal-extraction processing that resists motion and
low-perfusion artefact, multi-wavelength pulse co-oximetry that non-invasively
measures carboxy- and methaemoglobin and total haemoglobin,
plethysmographic indices such as the pleth variability index for fluid
responsiveness, and reflectance probes for poorly perfused patients — addressing
the principal limitations of conventional two-wavelength oximetry.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Pulse oximetry continuously and non-invasively measures the FUNCTIONAL
arterial oxygen saturation (normally 96-100% on air) by combining two principles:
SPECTROPHOTOMETRY (oxygenated haemoglobin absorbs more infrared and less red light
at ~940 and ~660 nm; deoxygenated the reverse) and PLETHYSMOGRAPHY (detecting only
the pulsatile arterial component of absorption,
discarding the constant tissue/venous background).
Second, It computes the ratio of pulsatile red to infrared absorption (the ratio
cancels the unknown path length) and converts it to saturation via an EMPIRICAL
calibration derived in volunteers down to ~70-80% - so it needs no user calibration
but is unreliable below ~70%; the sigmoid dissociation curve means saturation is
insensitive to falling oxygen tension while tension is high (a normal SpO2 does not
guarantee reserve) but falls steeply once tension drops below ~8 kPa.
Third, Errors arise from a poor/absent pulsatile signal (poor perfusion,
hypothermia, hypovolaemia, vasoconstriction, vasopressors), motion artefact,
ambient light and diathermy, optical interference (nail varnish,
methylene blue dye, anaemia), venous pulsation, and a peripheral detection delay;
fetal haemoglobin and bilirubin do NOT significantly interfere,
while dark skin pigmentation can slightly overestimate saturation (occult
hypoxaemia).
Fourth, The two-wavelength oximeter cannot distinguish DYSHAEMOGLOBINS:
carboxyhaemoglobin (carbon monoxide poisoning) is read as oxygenated haemoglobin,
causing dangerous OVERESTIMATION that masks hypoxaemia;
methaemoglobin drives the reading toward ~85% regardless of the true value -
multi-wavelength CO-OXIMETRY (measuring fractional saturation and all species) is
needed when these are suspected.
Fifth, Pulse oximetry monitors VENTILATION poorly (no CO2;
a patient on supplemental oxygen can hypoventilate severely with a normal
saturation) so must be combined with CAPNOGRAPHY;
the plethysmographic waveform confirms a genuine pulse and signal reliability,
shows rate/rhythm and perfusion, and its respiratory variation indicates
hypovolaemia/fluid responsiveness; beware pressure injury/burns from prolonged
probe application, especially in neonates and during MRI.
Thank you. That concludes the station.